Add Parallax2D progress report post (#823)
godotengine/godot-website: collections/_article/parallax-progress-report.md

Originally, `ParallaxBackground` was intentionally made a `CanvasLayer` (stay with me here) to take advantage of a quirk of the rendering system: each layer is processed one at a time. This provides space to repeat entire branches multiple times, achieving `ParallaxLayer`'s "infinite scrolling" effect. This isn't ideal, though. We want to allow this *anywhere* in the tree, not just at the root of a layer. By passing a field unique to `ParallaxLayer` further down in the renderer, we can have the same effect on a sub-branch. This also reveals something else significant: without the need for `ParallaxBackground` to be a `CanvasLayer`, there's not much of a need for `ParallaxBackground` at all! Aw man! This is starting to sound like a breaking change...

After consulting with a few other contributors, it was clear there were two options:
1. Wait until 5.0 and make these changes directly to `ParallaxLayer` and retire `ParallaxBackground`.
2. Make a new node and provide a conversion tool.

> BIG SURPRISE: we decided to go with the second option! Having duplicate features could be confusing to users, but because 4.0 only came out a year ago, users may be waiting a long time for these fixes if we push it out to a major release. Though... an entirely new node means we can make *even more* changes!

Reviewer: > BIG SURPRISE: we decided to go with the second option!

I really like your writing style, and don't mind that it leans more informal and humorous, if anything that makes it a pleasure to read in my book! However, here I would avoid going all caps since that is a little misleading in terms of importancy. I would remove this sentence and simply start the next one with "While..."

Additionally, I would rephrase the last one to "By creating an entirely new node we have the freedom to make these changes immediately, and *even more* of them"

### Bells *and* whistles

With the big change up front (inheriting `Node2D`, and consolidating the nodes), it'll be much easier to add features or fixes without breaking changes in the future. Here is a list of some of the most common issues and *hotly* requested features we've supported for `Parallax2D`:

- Simplified workflow
- Ability to follow camera rotation
- Compatibility with `CanvasGroup` and `BackBufferCopy`
- Support for zooming out with a `Camera2D`
- Autoscroll
- Improved documentation
- Performance improvements

#### Reogranization

![The Parallax2D inspector](/storage/blog/parallax2d/inspector.webp)

> The inspector properties are now reorganized and categorized. Notice that the limits now follow the same logic as `Camera2D` limits. How *standardized!* There are notes in the previous parallax system's documentation clarifying that `mirroring` doesn't actually mirror anything, but rather just repeats. The name has been changed to `repeat_size` to better reflect (ha!) what it actually does.

Reviewer: > (ha!)

Not needed, I would remove this one.

<video autoplay loop muted playsinline title="An demonstration of the parallax effect zoomed out">
  <source src="/storage/blog/parallax2d/zoom_out.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>

Increasing the `repeat_times` will allow for the number of repeats to grow and spread outward, so that you can zoom out and not reveal the magic going on behind the scenes. Eventually, it'd be nice to have a flag to adjust this automatically, but this is a good start! Bear in mind that this repeats *all* children of the `Parallax2D` node. If you want only one of the children to repeat, it might be preferable to use the `texture_repeat` property and `Sprite2D`'s region to prepare your background.

#### What else?

`Parallax2D` is now compatible with `BackBufferCopy` and `CanvasGroup`, and you're also free to rotate the camera without breaking the parallax effect! Upon a few initial tests, we noticed some performance increases as well.

### Caveats and future

> With any effect that is based on perception, there are some tricky areas (since the entire effect is a trick!). A few of the same drawbacks to `ParallaxBackground` still apply to `Parallax2D`. For example, multiple cameras aren't directly supported (booo!). This makes sense because `Parallax2D` follows the same concept as `ParallaxBackground`: the textures' positions are modified directly and move at different speeds relative to the viewport. If you have multiple viewports, the textures can't move relative to all of them and can't be in two places at once! Just like in `ParallaxBackground`, as a workaround, you can clone the `Parallax2D`s and place each in a separate viewport.

Reviewer: > (booo!)

Again, the sentence leaves a better impression on the reader without the interjection taking away from it, so I would cull it.

Additionally, even though `Parallax2D` is a `Node2D`, you should still take caution when moving or scaling any parent nodes. It can be a delicate effect, so it's recommended to be cautious in complex setups.

### Thanks!

Thanks to those who helped make this feature, especially: [MewPurPur](https://github.com/MewPurPur) for their lightning-fast SVG skills, [Mickeon](https://github.com/Mickeon) and [clayjohn](https://github.com/clayjohn) for championing this feature from the get-go, and [KoBeWi](https://github.com/KoBeWi), [AThousandShips](https://github.com/AThousandShips), and [adamscott](https://github.com/adamscott) for jumping in with detailed reviews and constant questions to make sure it covered all corner cases and was *just right*... not to mention a dozen others that helped with feedback and testing. I'm [Mark](https://github.com/markdibarry) (a.k.a. Mr. Dink in the Godot community). I've been contributing to the Godot engine for the last few years, but this is my first "big feature" contribution. I hope you like it!

> If you have any suggestions for improvement for `Parallax2D`, feel free to make a proposal or start a discussion. We already have some bug fixes on the way, so be sure to check the backlog first! If you've got a good idea or see room for improvement and are hesitant to start contributing, don't be! Even if you see a misspelled word in the docs or a something you think might be too small, it's not! We wouldn't be where we are without the willingness of our community to jump in and get their hands dirty... so join in!

Reviewer: >  If you've got a good idea or see room for improvement and are hesitant to start contributing, don't be! Even if you see a misspelled word in the docs or a something you think might be too small, it's not! We wouldn't be where we are without the willingness of our community to jump in and get their hands dirty... so join in!

I really like ending on a call to contribute, but I would slightly rephrase it for more impact. My proposal:

`Do you see room for improvement or felt the spark of an idea while reading this? We are always looking for more contributors and would be happy to have you. Don't worry about the size of your first submission, many of us have started with rectifying spelling errors in the docs. We wouldn't be where we are without the willingness of our community to jump in and get their hands dirty. What are you waiting for?`

Author: Love this!

---

Simulating depth with backgrounds is a staple of 2D games. Godot's parallax system has been part of the core node set before Godot even went open source. With all of Godot's advancements in the last decade, the parallax system has remained (mostly) the same. In the upcoming 4.3 release, it's time for it to get some love and attention too!

<video autoplay loop muted playsinline title="An example of the parallax effect">
  <source src="/storage/blog/parallax2d/scroll.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>

### A fresh start

`Parallax2D` is a new node intended as an all-in-one replacement for `ParallaxBackground` and `ParallaxLayer`. It's flagged as experimental in 4.3 and is subject to change while we get some more feedback, but the plan is to eventually deprecate the old nodes and make it permanent. There is feature-parity with the old system along with some new treats! You can convert your current `ParallaxBackground` and `ParallaxLayer`s by clicking on your `ParallaxBackground` node in the scene tree, then `Convert to Parallax2D` from the context dropdown.

![An example of converting to Parallax2D](/storage/blog/parallax2d/button.webp)

### Why the change?

> There've been a lot of proposals and issues regarding Godot's parallax system over the last few years. *Bogusly*, these had trouble getting movement without a significant overhaul of the two nodes that it's comprised of: `ParallaxBackground` and `ParallaxLayer`. Godot has introduced so many new features and upgrades in related areas (especially with 4.0) that the parallax system didn't originally need to support (because they didn't exist; A reasonable justification indeed!). I recently ran into one such case working on a faux-lighting system to replicate the look of lights on early video game consoles.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There have been a lot of proposals and issues regarding Godot's parallax system over the last few years. These had trouble getting movement without a significant overhaul of the two nodes that it's comprised of: `ParallaxBackground` and `ParallaxLayer`. Godot has introduced so many new features and upgrades in related areas (especially with 4.0) that the parallax system didn't originally need to support (because they didn't exist; a reasonable justification indeed!). I recently ran into one such case working on a faux-lighting system to replicate the look of lights on early video game consoles.
```

Reviewer 2: "There've" is legitimate, but a very unusual contraction. Bogus==not genuine, so not sure how that applies.

By the way, what era are you considering "early video game consoles"?

Author: I guess if I had to break it down, "Bogus" was a common phrase in the 90's meaning "disappointing", but is just used here to comedic effect (since it sounds very dated). It's just my writing style, but I can revise the post to remove things that don't convey a more serious tone.

If I had to pin-point the era for lighting in "early video game consoles", I'd say it'd be the 3rd (NES) through the 4th (SNES, Genesis, Gameboy). Before the 3rd, it was difficult to display much detail, and from somewhere between the 5th and 6th on they were able to use real lighting effects.

Reviewer 2: > I can revise the post to remove things that don't convey a more serious tone.

I'm not a super fan of the style, but I think it's OK to leave most of them in! I just dislike the ones that don't make sense. I'd be happy with "Disappointedly".

I think it would be better to say "NES-era" consoles, rather than "early". Early to me is Atari 2600!

Author: It's okay - my style's not for everyone! Not a big deal.

I have seen it in the 3rd gen, but it was definitely more common in the 4th. I'll split the difference. Thanks for the feedback!

Author: Actually, now that you mention it, should I just remove references to my personal project? It's not 100% necessary to get the concept across, and digresses from the blog post early on. If I remove from the "I recently ran into..." to the "Is that a problem?" section. It'd make the blog post a lot more concise and easy to follow. I can just give a short sentence or two on how it used to work internally.

Reviewer 2: To be honest, I did get a bit lost during the explanation of your project and the problems you found. It might have been clearer with screenshots, but that would make the article even longer. If you can manage without the digression (while still trying to make it clear why the old system had limitations), I think it would indeed improve the article.

<video autoplay loop muted playsinline title="An example of 2D fake light effect">
  <source src="/storage/blog/parallax2d/lights.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>

To achieve this light effect, I used `GradientTexture2D`s to mask foreground objects or `ColorRect` overlays (or both!). This works by using a `MultiMeshInstance2D` with a script to display the circular gradient "lights" and follow game objects you specify. Each "light" has a shader attached that pixelizes and dithers the gradient before it's used as a mask via a `BackBufferCopy` node. This works really well and is very performant. I didn't even see much of a performance difference between 8 or 8000 lights! It's easy to use too. Just add a `LightSource` node to the thing you want to light up, and drop your overlay/foreground in a `LightDisplay` node. Anyway...

### Weren't you gonna talk about parallax?

> Right! Along the way to my destination of "artificial luminescence", I drove too fast and hit a speed bump. To have one object mask another, they need to be in the same `CanvasLayer`, which introduces a unique problem: `ParallaxLayer`s are easy to setup, but they're restricted to being direct children of a `ParallaxBackground`. Unfortunately (even more troublesome), `ParallaxBackground`'s base class is `CanvasLayer` - It's on an entirely different layer, making it completely incompatible and unseen when using a screen-reading shader. How inflexible! It looked like my only options were to give up or attempt to make `ParallaxBackground` somehow compatible with `BackBufferCopy` and `CanvasGroup`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Right! Along the way to my destination of "artificial luminescence", I drove too fast and hit a speed bump. To have one object mask another, they need to be in the same `CanvasLayer`, which introduces a unique problem: `ParallaxLayer`s are easy to setup, but they're restricted to being direct children of a `ParallaxBackground`. Unfortunately (even more troublesome), `ParallaxBackground`'s base class is `CanvasLayer` - it's on an entirely different layer, making it completely incompatible and unseen when using a screen-reading shader. How inflexible! It looked like my only options were to give up or attempt to make `ParallaxBackground` somehow compatible with `BackBufferCopy` and `CanvasGroup`.
```

I initially, *innocently* assessed that this issue would be swiftly solved by changing `ParallaxBackground`'s base class from `CanvasLayer` to `Node2D`. It makes sense, right? `ParallaxBackground` doesn't really *act* like a `CanvasLayer`... so, instead of a bunch of workarounds to make a `CanvasLayer` behave like a `Node2D`, why not just start out on the right foot? But... that sounds too *easy!* It ate at me that `CanvasLayer` seemed like such a *specific* choice; I just had to know why!

> `ParallaxLayer` not only provides a parallax effect, but also an award-winning "infinite scrolling" bonus effect ("Best in Class" for 2018 AND 2019 - The class being `ParallaxLayer`). Of course, actual infinite scrolling isn't possible (right?), so, behind the scenes, Godot performs a bit of visual trickery:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`ParallaxLayer` not only provides a parallax effect, but also an award-winning "infinite scrolling" bonus effect ("Best in Class" for 2018 AND 2019 - the class being `ParallaxLayer`). Of course, actual infinite scrolling isn't possible (right?), so, behind the scenes, Godot performs a bit of visual trickery:
```
I don't really understand the best in class comment.

Author: Just another attempt at a fun sidebar. "Best in class" is a common award. `ParallaxLayer` is a class. I can remove it.

Reviewer 2: Oh right, I get it now! Yeah, that didn't land with me!

<video autoplay loop muted playsinline title="Godot mascot riding in a convertible on a stage">
  <source src="/storage/blog/parallax2d/secret.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>

> It renders the children of a `ParallaxLayer` a second time, so that it can look like it's wrapping around, and when the screen scrolls far enough - *ZIP!* - it whips back like a typewriter (an ancient writing tool) and makes it *appear* like it's scrolling forever!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It renders the children of a `ParallaxLayer` a second time, so that it can look like it's wrapping around, and when the screen scrolls far enough - *ZIP!* - it whips back like a typewriter and makes it *appear* like it's scrolling forever!
```
Come on, it's not a stone tablet and chisel!

Author: Another joke; I'll remove it.

Reviewer 2: I'm sure I'm coming over as a terribly boring person!

Author: No it's fine! I wasn't sure the tone I was supposed to be setting so I just went with what came naturally. I'm actually going to take another pass at the post in full. I think I was a little too playful with a lot of the phrasing.

### Is that a problem?

This *does* work, but it's pretty rigid. We want to allow a parallax effect *anywhere* in the tree, not just at the root of a layer. A lot has changed in the renderer in the last ten years, so this may have been much more difficult in the past (or impossible? maybe?), but by passing the `mirror` value a little further down in the renderer, we can have the same effect on a sub-branch. This also reveals something else significant: without the need for `ParallaxBackground` to be a `CanvasLayer`, there's not much of a need for `ParallaxBackground` at all! Haha! Ha... Aw man. This is starting to sound like a breaking change.

After consulting with a few other contributors, it was clear there were two options:
1. Wait until 5.0 and make these changes directly to `ParallaxLayer` and retire `ParallaxBackground`.
2. Make a new node and provide a conversion tool (spoiler: we picked #2).

> It's risky either way. With the second option, having duplicate features could be confusing to users, but because because 4.0 only came out a year ago, users may be waiting a long time for these fixes if we push it out to a major release. Though... an entirely new node means we can make *even more* changes. >:)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It's risky either way. With the second option, having duplicate features could be confusing to users, but because 4.0 only came out a year ago, users may be waiting a long time for these fixes if we push it out to a major release. Though... an entirely new node means we can make *even more* changes. >:)
```

Requiring two nodes in a strict hierarchy has been a point of confusion and frustration for users in the past, with it not always being the clearest *which* node is responsible for *what*. With the `CanvasLayer` trick no longer required for the "infinite repeat" effect, it frees us up for some simplification. We discussed this decision in depth, and have a few reasons for it.

If the new `Parallax2D` were required to be a direct child of something like `ParallaxBackground`, the only purpose it'd serve is to run a for-loop over all its children for setting values. A nice shortcut, but it isn't enough to warrant a whole separate core node and enforce that relationship. Some new handy editor shortcuts were provided in the years since the parallax system was first put in place, like the ability to select multiple of the same node and update shared properties all at once! If a user wants to update all the nodes via code, they'd need to write a script for it anyway, so it's best left up to the user on a case-by-case basis. Even so, I've been thinking about making an add-on if no one else beats me to it!

#### What if I *want* it to work like a `CanvasLayer`?

> Here's the cool thing: *It still can!* Just put it in a `CanvasLayer`! The difference now is that you can choose. Just like any normal `Node2D`, placing a `Parallax2D` in a `CanvasLayer` will prevent zoom and rotating with the camera. You'll just want to make sure the `Parallax2D`'s `follow_viewport` value matches the `CanvasLayer`'s `follow_viewport_enabled` property. At this point you may notice that `Parallax2D`'s `follow_viewport` is enabled by default. That's because it *is* following the viewport! It's the core concept of the whole effect! This was a decision made because `ParallaxBackground`'s `follow_viewport_enabled` is *not* enabled even though it *is* following the viewport. It's confusing for a `CanvasLayer` to not behave like a `CanvasLayer`, so `Parallax2D` behaves more like one would expect.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here's the cool thing: *it still can!* Just put it in a `CanvasLayer`! The difference now is that you can choose. Just like any normal `Node2D`, placing a `Parallax2D` in a `CanvasLayer` will prevent zoom and rotating with the camera. You'll just want to make sure the `Parallax2D`'s `follow_viewport` value matches the `CanvasLayer`'s `follow_viewport_enabled` property. At this point you may notice that `Parallax2D`'s `follow_viewport` is enabled by default. That's because it *is* following the viewport! It's the core concept of the whole effect! This was a decision made because `ParallaxBackground`'s `follow_viewport_enabled` is *not* enabled even though it *is* following the viewport. It's confusing for a `CanvasLayer` to not behave like a `CanvasLayer`, so `Parallax2D` behaves more like one would expect.
```

> #### The right time to scroll to me

Reviewer 2: ?

Author: I was trying to think of flavorful section titles, and the song "Roll to Me" came to mind. I'll think of something else.

`autoscroll` scrolls the layer *automatically* in addition to the parallax settings. Honestly, that's it! This could be done with a custom script, but it was highly requested, easy to implement, and had no performance hit if you weren't using it. So, why not?

<video autoplay loop muted playsinline title="An example of parallax scrolling with autoscroll enabled">
  <source src="/storage/blog/parallax2d/autoscroll.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>

> #### Positive growth

Reviewer 2: ?

Author: The `repeat_times` field makes the textures grow... "positive growth" can also mean improvement. I'll think of another phrase.

This shouldn't come up often, but the new `repeat_times` property is being introduced to help with the problem of zooming out while trying to achieve an infinite repeat effect. When you zoom out and the repeat size becomes smaller than the screen, the effect is broken! 

<video autoplay loop muted playsinline title="An demonstration of the parallax effect zoomed out">
  <source src="/storage/blog/parallax2d/zoom_out.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>

Increasing the `repeat_times` will allow for the number of repeats to grow and spread outward, so that you can zoom out and not reveal the magic going on behind the scenes. Eventually, it'd be nice to have a flag to have this adjust automatically, but this is a good start!

#### What else?

> `Parallax2D` is now compatible with `BackBufferCopy` and `CanvasGroup`, and you're also free to rotate the camera without breaking the parallax effect! Some things needed shifted around in the `ParallaxBackground` code to accommodate the new changes and I discovered a nice surprise. Through some basic tests with 20 complex layers (comparing before and after the feature was added), I saw a good performance boost with both the old system and the new one with the changes... which is nice!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`Parallax2D` is now compatible with `BackBufferCopy` and `CanvasGroup`, and you're also free to rotate the camera without breaking the parallax effect! Some things needed shifting around in the `ParallaxBackground` code to accommodate the new changes and I discovered a nice surprise. Through some basic tests with 20 complex layers (comparing before and after the feature was added), I saw a good performance boost with both the old system and the new one with the changes... which is nice!
```

> `Parallax2D` is now compatible with `BackBufferCopy` and `CanvasGroup`, and you're also free to rotate the camera without breaking the parallax effect! Some things needed shifted around in the `ParallaxBackground` code to accommodate the new changes and I discovered a nice surprise. Through some basic tests with 20 complex layers (comparing before and after the feature was added), I saw a good performance boost with both the old system and the new one with the changes... which is nice!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`Parallax2D` is now compatible with `BackBufferCopy` and `CanvasGroup`, and you're also free to rotate the camera without breaking the parallax effect! Some things needed shifting around in the `ParallaxBackground` code to accommodate the new changes and I discovered a nice surprise. Through some basic tests with 20 complex layers (comparing before and after the feature was added), I saw a good performance boost with both the old system and the new one with the changes... which is nice!
```

> ### Caveats and Future

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Caveats and future
```

> With any effect that is based on perception, there are some tricky areas (since the entire effect is a trick!). A few of the same drawbacks to `ParallaxBackground` still apply to `Parallax2D`. For example, multiple cameras aren't directly supported (boooo!). This makes sense because `Parallax2D` follows the same concept as `ParallaxBackground`: Textures move at different speeds relative to the viewport. If you have multiple viewports, the textures can't move relative to all of them and can't be in two places at once! Just like in `ParallaxBackground`, as a workaround, you can clone the `Parallax2D`s and place each in a separate viewport. Besides the other future improvements mentioned earlier in this article, I'm also looking for ideas to better visualize parallax in the editor, whether that comes in the form of guides or another editor tool.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With any effect that is based on perception, there are some tricky areas (since the entire effect is a trick!). A few of the same drawbacks to `ParallaxBackground` still apply to `Parallax2D`. For example, multiple cameras aren't directly supported (boooo!). This makes sense because `Parallax2D` follows the same concept as `ParallaxBackground`: textures move at different speeds relative to the viewport. If you have multiple viewports, the textures can't move relative to all of them and can't be in two places at once! Just like in `ParallaxBackground`, as a workaround, you can clone the `Parallax2D`s and place each in a separate viewport. Besides the other future improvements mentioned earlier in this article, I'm also looking for ideas to better visualize parallax in the editor, whether that comes in the form of guides or another editor tool.
```

### Thanks!

> Thanks to those who helped make this feature. I would like to especially thank: [MewPurPur](https://github.com/MewPurPur) for their lightning-fast svg skills, [Mickeon](https://github.com/Mickeon) for championing my PR from the get-go, [KoBeWi](https://github.com/KoBeWi), [AThousandShips](https://github.com/AThousandShips), and [adamscott](https://github.com/adamscott) for jumping in with detailed reviews and constant questions to make sure it covered all corner cases and was *just right*... not to mention a dozen others that helped with feedback and testing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thanks to those who helped make this feature. I would like to especially thank: [MewPurPur](https://github.com/MewPurPur) for their lightning-fast SVG skills, [Mickeon](https://github.com/Mickeon) for championing my PR from the get-go, [KoBeWi](https://github.com/KoBeWi), [AThousandShips](https://github.com/AThousandShips), and [adamscott](https://github.com/adamscott) for jumping in with detailed reviews and constant questions to make sure it covered all corner cases and was *just right*... not to mention a dozen others that helped with feedback and testing.
```

Author: I removed the specific reasons for the shout outs. It was more playful than informative.

> I'm [Mark](https://github.com/markdibarry) (a.k.a. Mr. Dink in the Godot community). I've been contributing to the Godot engine for the last few years, but this is my first "big feature" contribution. If you have any suggestions for improvement for `Parallax2D`, please reach out or start a discussion. Heck! If you've got a good idea or see room for improvement and are hesitant to start contributing, don't be! Even if you see a misspelled word in the docs or a something you think might be too small, it's not! The thing that makes Godot unique is its community always willing to make it better.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I'm [Mark](https://github.com/markdibarry) (a.k.a. Mr. Dink in the Godot community). I've been contributing to the Godot engine for the last few years, but this is my first "big feature" contribution. If you have any suggestions for improvement for `Parallax2D`, please reach out or start a discussion. Heck! If you've got a good idea or see room for improvement and are hesitant to start contributing, don't be! Even if you see a misspelled word in the docs or a something you think might be too small, it's not! The thing that makes Godot unique is its community is always willing to make it better.
```
Although tbh, I think it's exaggerating to say this is unique.

Author: You're right. I removed that sentence.

![An example of converting to Parallax2D](/storage/blog/parallax2d/button.webp)

### Reasoning

There have been a lot of proposals and issues regarding Godot's parallax system over the last few years. These had trouble getting movement without a significant overhaul of the two nodes that it's comprised of: `ParallaxBackground` and `ParallaxLayer`. Godot has introduced so many new features and upgrades in related areas that the parallax system didn't originally need to support.

> Originally, `ParallaxBackground` was intentionally made a `CanvasLayer` to take advantage of a quirk of the rendering system: Each layer is processed one at a time. This provides space to repeat entire branches multiple times, achieving `ParallaxLayer`'s "mirroring" effect. Not ideally, this setup is inflexible. We want to allow a parallax effect anywhere in the tree, not just at the root of a layer. By passing the `mirror` value further down in the renderer, we can have the same effect on a sub-branch. This also reveals something else significant: without the need for `ParallaxBackground` to be a `CanvasLayer`, there's not much of a need for `ParallaxBackground` at all.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Originally, `ParallaxBackground` was intentionally made a `CanvasLayer` to take advantage of a quirk of the rendering system: each layer is processed one at a time. This provides space to repeat entire branches multiple times, achieving `ParallaxLayer`'s "mirroring" effect. Not ideally, this setup is inflexible. We want to allow a parallax effect anywhere in the tree, not just at the root of a layer. By passing the `mirror` value further down in the renderer, we can have the same effect on a sub-branch. This also reveals something else significant: without the need for `ParallaxBackground` to be a `CanvasLayer`, there's not much of a need for `ParallaxBackground` at all.
```

After consulting with a few other contributors, it was clear there were two options:
1. Wait until 5.0 and make these changes directly to `ParallaxLayer` and retire `ParallaxBackground`.
2. Make a new node and provide a conversion tool.

> With the second option, having duplicate features could be confusing to users, but because 4.0 only came out a year ago, users may be waiting a long time for these fixes if we push it out to a major release.

Reviewer 2: I think (just to make it clear), you should add something like "We decided to go with the second option".

### Extra features

With the big breaking change being up front (inheriting `Node2D`, and consolidating the nodes), it'll be much easier to add features or fixes without breaking changes in the future. Here is a list of some of the most common issues and requested features users had:

- Ability to follow camera rotation
- Compatibility with `CanvasGroup` and `BackBufferCopy`
- Support for zooming out with a `Camera2D`
- A simpler workflow
- Autoscroll
- Performance improvements
- Better documentation

> 

Reviewer 2: I think you should make it clear that this is not just a wishlist, but actually that Parallax2D has implemented these (as you had previously).

#### `CanvasLayer` to `Node2D`

You can still get the benefits of a `CanvasLayer`. The difference now is that you can choose. Just like any normal `Node2D`, placing a `Parallax2D` in a `CanvasLayer` will prevent zoom and rotating with the camera. You'll just want to make sure the `Parallax2D`'s `follow_viewport` value matches the `CanvasLayer`'s `follow_viewport_enabled` property. At this point you may notice that `Parallax2D`'s `follow_viewport` is enabled by default. This was a decision made because `ParallaxBackground`'s `follow_viewport_enabled` is not enabled even though it is following the viewport. It's confusing for a `CanvasLayer` to not behave like a `CanvasLayer`, so `Parallax2D` behaves more like one would expect.

#### `autoscroll`

> `autoscroll` scrolls the layer automatically in addition to the parallax settings. This could be done with a custom script, but decided to do so anyway since it was highly requested, easy to implement, and had no performance hit if you weren't using it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`autoscroll` scrolls the layer automatically in addition to the parallax settings. This could be done with a custom script, but we decided to put this into `Parallax2D` since it was highly requested, easy to implement, and has no performance hit if you aren't using it.
```

  <source src="/storage/blog/parallax2d/zoom_out.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>

Increasing the `repeat_times` will allow for the number of repeats to grow and spread outward, so that you can zoom out and not reveal the magic going on behind the scenes. Eventually, it'd be nice to have a flag to have this adjust automatically, but this is a good start!

#### What else?

`Parallax2D` is now compatible with `BackBufferCopy` and `CanvasGroup`, and you're also free to rotate the camera without breaking the parallax effect!

### Caveats and future

With any effect that is based on perception, there are some tricky areas. A few of the same drawbacks to `ParallaxBackground` still apply to `Parallax2D`. For example, multiple cameras aren't directly supported. This makes sense because `Parallax2D` follows the same concept as `ParallaxBackground`: textures move at different speeds relative to the viewport. If you have multiple viewports, the textures can't move relative to all of them and can't be in two places at once! Just like in `ParallaxBackground`, as a workaround, you can clone the `Parallax2D`s and place each in a separate viewport.

### Thank you

> Thanks to those who helped make this feature, especially: [MewPurPur](https://github.com/MewPurPur), [Mickeon](https://github.com/Mickeon), [KoBeWi](https://github.com/KoBeWi), [AThousandShips](https://github.com/AThousandShips), and [adamscott](https://github.com/adamscott), not to mention a dozen others that helped with feedback and testing. If you have any suggestions for improvement for `Parallax2D`, please make a proposal or start a discussion. If you've got a good idea or see room for improvement and are hesitant to start contributing, don't be! Even if you see a misspelled word in the docs or a something you think might be too small, it's not!

Reviewer 2: Add yourself to this list, Mark!

Author: Haha. Totally forgot! Will do!

### A fresh start

> `Parallax2D` is a new node intended as an all-in-one replacement for `ParallaxBackground` and `ParallaxLayer`. It has feature-parity with the old system along with some new goodies! This is only the beginning, though; There's tons of improvements that can still be made! It's flagged as experimental in 4.3 and is subject to change while we get some more feedback. The plan is to eventually deprecate (not remove) the old nodes, but rest assured, they won't be deprecated until we are confident they are fully superseded by `Parallax2D`. New features will be focused on `Parallax2D`, but we will still be accepting bug fixes for the old nodes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`Parallax2D` is a new node intended as an all-in-one replacement for `ParallaxBackground` and `ParallaxLayer`. It has feature-parity with the old system along with some new goodies! This is only the beginning, though; there's tons of improvements that can still be made! It's flagged as experimental in 4.3 and is subject to change while we get some more feedback. The plan is to eventually deprecate (not remove) the old nodes, but rest assured, they won't be deprecated until we are confident they are fully superseded by `Parallax2D`. New features will be focused on `Parallax2D`, but we will still be accepting bug fixes for the old nodes.
```

With any effect that is based on perception, there are some tricky areas (since the entire effect is a trick!). A few of the same drawbacks to `ParallaxBackground` still apply to `Parallax2D`. For example, multiple cameras aren't directly supported (booo!). This makes sense because `Parallax2D` follows the same concept as `ParallaxBackground`: textures move at different speeds relative to the viewport. If you have multiple viewports, the textures can't move relative to all of them and can't be in two places at once! Just like in `ParallaxBackground`, as a workaround, you can clone the `Parallax2D`s and place each in a separate viewport.

> Additionally, even though `Parallax2D` is a `Node2D`, you should still take caution when moving or scaling any parent nodes. It can be a delicate effect, so its recommended to be careful in complex setups.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, even though `Parallax2D` is a `Node2D`, you should still take caution when moving or scaling any parent nodes. It can be a delicate effect, so it's recommended to be careful in complex setups.
```
